on saving money made some difference
she bid me not think of it for she would
abate me
two shillings a week for the future so i
remained with her at one shilling and
six months
as long as i stayed in london in a
garrett of her house there lived a
maiden lady of 70
in the most retired manner of which my
landlady gave me this account
that she being a roman catholic had been
set abroad when young
and lodged in a nunnery with the intent
of becoming a nun
but the country not agreeing with her
she returned to england where
there being no nunnery she had vowed to
lead a life of a nun as near as might be
done
in those circumstances accordingly she
had given all her estate to charitable
uses reserving only 12 pounds a year to
live on
and out of this sum she still gave a
great deal to charity
living herself on water cruel only and
using no
fire but to boil it she had lived many
years
in that garrett being permitted to
remain their gratis
by successive catholic tenants of the
house below
as they deemed it a blessing to have her
there a priest visited her
to confess her every day i have asked
her said
my landlady how she as she lived
could possibly find so much employment
for a confessor
oh she said it is impossible to avoid
vain thoughts
i was permitted once to visit her she
was cheerful and polite
and conversed pleasantly the room was
clean but had no other furniture
than a maltese a table with a crucifix
and a book
a stool which she gave me to sit on and
a picture over the chimney of saint
veronica
displaying her handkerchief with the
miraculous figure of christ's bleeding
face on it
which she explained to me with great
seriousness
she looked pale but was never sick and i
gave it as another instance
on how small an income life and health
may be supported at watts printing house
i contracted
an acquaintance with an ingenious young
man one y gate
who having healthy relations had been
better educated than most printers
was a tolerable latinist spoke french
and loved reading i taught him and a
friend of his
to swim at twice going into the river
and they soon became good swimmers
they introduced me to some gentleman
from the country who went to chelsea by
water
to see the college and don zatero's
curiosities
in our return at the request of the
company whose curiosity y
gate had excited i stripped and leapt
into the river and swam
from near chelsea to blackfires
performing
on the way many feats of activity both
upon
and underwater that surprised and
pleased those
to whom they were novelties begin
footnote
the story is that she met christ on his
way to crucifixion and offered him
her handkerchief to wipe the blood from
his face
after which the handkerchief always bore
the image of christ's bleeding face
james salter a former servant of han
sloan
lived in cheney walk chelsea his house a
barber shop
was known as don salato's coffee house
the curiosities were in glass cases and
constituted an amazing
and motley collection a petrified crab
from china
a liquefied hog job's tears
madagascar lances william the
conqueror's flaming sword
and henry viii's coat of mail
the swim was of about three miles
and a footnote i had from a child been
ever delighted
in this exercise had studied and
practiced all trevor's motions and
positions
added some of my own aiming at the
graceful and
easy as well as the useful all these i
took this occasion of exhibiting to the
company
and was much flattered by their
admiration and why gate
who was desirous of becoming a master
grew more and more attached to me
on that account as well as from the
similarity of our studies
he at length proposed to me traveling
all over europe together
supporting ourselves everywhere by
working at our business
i was once inclined to it but mentioned
it to my good
friend mr denham with whom i often spent
an hour when i had leisure
he dissuaded me from it advising me to
think only of returning to pennsylvania
which he was now about to do i must
record
one trait of this good man's character
he had formerly been
in business at bristol but failed in
debt
to a number of people compounded and
went
to america thereby a close application
to business as a merchant he acquired a
plentiful fortune
in a few years returning to england in
the ship with me he invited his old
creditors
to an entertainment at which he thanked
them for the easy composition
they had favored with him and when they
expected nothing but the treat
every man at the first remove found
under his plate
an order on a banker for the full amount
of the unpaid
remainder with interest he now told me
he was about to return to philadelphia
and should carry over
a great quantity of goods in order to
open a store there
he proposed to take me over as his clerk
to keep his books
in which he would instruct me copy his
letters and attend the store
he added that as soon as i should be
acquainted with mercantile business
he would promote me by sending me with a
cargo of flour and bread
etc to the west indies and procure me
commissioned from
others which would be profitable and if
i managed well would establish me
handsomely
the thing pleased me for i was grown
tired of london
remembering with pleasure the happy
months i had spent in pennsylvania
and wished again to see it therefore i
immediately agreed on the terms of 50
pounds a year
about 167 dollars pennsylvania money
less indeed than my present gettings as
a compositor
but affording a better prospect i took
leave a printing as though forever
and was daily employed in the new
business
going about it with mr denham among the
tradesmen to purchase various articles
and seeing them packed up
doing errands calling upon workmen to
dispatch etc
and when all was on board i had a few
days leisure
on one of these days i was to my
surprise
sent for by a great man i knew only by
name
a sir william windham and i waited upon
him
he had heard by some means or other of
my swimming from chelsea to blackfyres
and my teaching why gate and another
young man to swim in a few hours
he had two sons about to set out on
their travels
he wished to have them first taught
swimming and proposed to gratify me
handsomely
if i would teach them they were not yet
come to town and my stay was uncertain
so i could not undertake it but from
this incident
i thought it likely that if i were to
remain in england and open a swimming
school
i might get a good deal of money and it
struck me so
strongly that the overture seemed sooner
made me
perhaps i should not so soon have
returned to america
after many years you and i had something
of more importance to do
with one of these sons of sir william
windham
become earl of edgemont which i shall
mention
in its place thus i spent about 18
months in london most part of the time
i worked hard at my business and spent
but little upon myself
except in seeing plays and in books my
friend ralph had kept me poor
he owed me about 27 pounds which i was
now never likely to receive
a great sum out of my small earnings i
loved him
notwithstanding for he had many
admirable qualities
i had by no means improved my fortune
but i had picked up some very
ingenious acquaintance whose
conversation
was of great advantage to me and i had
read
considerably end of chapter 6.
the autobiography of benjamin franklin
chapter 7 this is a librivox recording
all librivox recordings are in the
public domain for more information
or to volunteer please visit
librivox.org
the autobiography of benjamin franklin
edited by frank
woodworth pine chapter 7
beginning business in philadelphia we
sailed from gravesend on the 23rd of
july
1726 for the incidents of the voyage
i refer you to my journal where you will
find them
all minutely related perhaps the most
important part of that journal is the
plan
to be found in it which i formed at sea
for regulating my future conduct in life
it is the more remarkable as being
formed when i was so young
and yet being pretty faithfully adhered
to quite through to old age
footnote the journal is not found in the
manuscript journal
which was left among franklin's papers
and
a footnote we landed in philadelphia on
the 11th of october where i found
sundry alterations keith was no longer
governor being
superseded by mayor gordon i met him
walking the streets as a common citizen
he seemed a little ashamed at seeing me
but passed without saying anything
i should have been as much ashamed as
seeing miss reed
had not her friends despairing with
reason of my return
after the receipt of my letter persuaded
her to marry another
one rogers a potter which was done in my
absence
with him however she was never happy and
soon parted from him
refusing to cohabit with him or bear his
name
it being now said that he had another
wife
he was a worthless fellow though an
excellent workman
which was the temptation to her friends
she got
into debt ran away in 1727
or 1728 went to the west indies
and died there kymer had got a better
house
a shop well supplied with stationery
plenty of new types
a number of hands though none good and
seemed to have great deal of business
mr denham took a store in water street
where we opened our goods
i attended the business diligently
studied accounts
and grew in a little time expert at
selling
we lodged and boarded together he
counseled me
as a father having a sincere regard for
me i respected and loved him
and we might have gone on together very
happy but in the beginning of february
1726 1727
when i had just passed my 21st year
we both were taken ill my distemper was
a pleurisy
which very nearly carried me off i
suffered a good
deal gave up the point in my own mind
and was rather disappointed when i found
myself recovering
regretting in some degree that i must
now sometime or other
have all that disagreeable work to do
over again
i forgot what his distemper was it held
him
a long time and at length carried him
off
he left me a small legacy in a
nuncupative will
as a token for his kindness for me and
he left me once more
to the wide world for the store was
taken into the care of his executors
and my employment under him ended
my brother-in-law holmes being now in
philadelphia
advised my return to my business and
kymer tempted me with an offer of large
wages by the year to come and take the
management of his printing house
that he might better attend his
stationers shop
i had heard a bad character of him in
london from his wife
and her friends and was not fond of
having any more to do with him
i tried for further employment as a
merchant's clerk but not
readily meeting with any i closed again
with kymer
i found in his house these hands hugh
meredith a welsh
pennsylvanian 30 years of age bred
to country work honest sensible
had a great deal of solid observation
with something of a reader
but given to drink stephen potts a young
countryman
of full age bred to the same of uncommon
natural parts
and great wit and humor but a little
idle
these he had agreed with at extreme low
wages
per week to be raised a shilling every
three months as they would
deserve by improving in their business
and the expectation of these high wages
to come on hereafter
was what he had drawn them in with
meredith was to work at press pots at
bookbinding
which he by agreement was to teach them
though he knew neither
one nor to other john a wild irishman
brought up to no business whose service
for four years kymer had purchased
from the captain of a ship he too was to
be made a pressman
george webb an oxford scholar whose time
for four years he had likewise bought
intending him for a compositor of whom
more presently and david harry country
boy
whom he had taken apprentice i soon
perceived that the intention of engaging
me at wages
so much higher than he had been used to
give
was to have these raw cheap hands
formed through me and as soon as i had
instructed them
then they being all article to him he
should be able to do without me
i went on however very cheerfully put
his printing house in order
which had been in great confusion and
brought his hands by degree
to mind their business and to do it
better it was an
odd thing to find an oxford scholar in
the situation
of a bought servant he was not more than
18 years of age
and gave me this account of himself that
he was born in gloucester
educated at grammar school there had
been distinguished among the scholars
for some apparent superiority in
performing his part
when they exhibited plays belonged to
the whitty club
there and had written some pieces in
prose and verse
which were printed in the gloucester
newspaper thence he was sent to oxford
where he continued about a year but not
well satisfied wishing of all things to
see london
and become a player at length receiving
his quarterly allowance of 15 guineas
instead of discharging his debts he
walked out of town hid his gown in a
freeze
bush and footed it to london where
having no friend to advise him
he fell into bad company soon spent his
guineas
found no means of being introduced among
the players
crew necesitis pawned his clothes and
wanted bread
walking the street very hungry and not
knowing what to do with himself
a crimp's bill was put into his hand
begin footnote a crimp was the agent of
a shipping company
crimps were sometimes employed to decoy
men into such a service
as is here mentioned and a footnote
offering immediate entertainment and
encouragement to such as would bind
themselves to serve in america
he went directly signed the indenture
was put into the ship
and came over never writing a line to
acquaint his friends
what was become of him he was lively
witty good-natured and a pleasant
companion
but idle thoughtless and imprudent to
the last degree
john the irishman soon ran away with the
rest i began to live
very agreeably for they all respected me
the more
as they found a chimer incapable of
instructing them
and that from me they learned to
something daily we never worked on
saturday
that being kaimer's sabbath so i had two
days for reading
my acquaintance with the ingenious
people in the town increased
kymer himself treated me with great
civility and apparent regard
and nothing now made me uneasy but my
debt to vernon
which i was yet unable to pay being
hitherto but a poor economist
he however kindly made no demand of it
our printing house often wanted sorts
and there was no
letter founder in america i had seen
types cast at james in london
but without much attention to the matter
however i now contrived a mold
made use of the letters we had as
punch-ons
struck the matrices in lead and thus
supplied
in a pretty tolerable way all the
deficiencies
i also engraved several things on
occasion i made the ink
i was were hausmann and everything and
in short
quite a facultum but however serviceable
i might be
i found that my services became every
day of less importance
as the other hands improved in the
business and when kymer
paid my second quarter's wages he let me
know that he felt them too heavy
and thought i should make an abatement
he grew by degree less civil
put on more of the master frequently
found fault
was captures and seemed ready for
an outbreak and went on nevertheless
with a good deal of patience
thinking that his encumbered
circumstances were partly the cause
at length a trifle snapped our
connection for the great
noise happening near the courthouse i
put my head out of the window to see
what was the matter
camera being in the street looked up and
saw me call out to me in a loud voice
and angry tone
to mind my business adding some
reproachful words
that netted me the more for their
publicity all
of the neighbors who were looking out on
the same occasion
being witness how i was treated he came
up immediately into the printing house
continued the quarrel high wards passed
on both sides
he gave me a quarter's warning we had
stipulated
expressing a wish that he had not been
obliged
so long a warning i told him his wish
was unnecessary for i would leave him
that
instant and so taking my hat walked out
of doors
desiring meredith whom i saw below to
take care of some things i left
and bring them to my lodgings meredith
came accordingly in the evening
when we talked to my affair over he had
conceived great regard for me
and was very unwilling that i should
leave the house while he remained in it
he dissuaded me from returning to my
native country
which i began to think of he reminded me
that kymer was in debt
for all he possessed that his creditors
began to be
uneasy that he kept his shop miserably
sold often without profit for ready
money and often trusted without keeping
accounts
that he must therefore fail which would
make a vacancy i might profit of
i objected my want of money he then let
me
know how his father had a high opinion
of me and from some discourse that had
passed between them
he was sure he would advance money to
set me up
if i would enter into partnership with
him my time
says he will be out with kymer in the
spring by that time
we may have our present types in from
london i am sensible i am no workman
if you like it your skill in the
business shall be set against the stock
i furnish
and we will share the profits equally
the provision was agreeable
and i consented his father was in town
and approved of it
the more as he saw i had great influence
with his son
had prevailed on him to abstain long
from dram drinking
and he hoped might break him of that
wretched habit entirely when we came to
be so closely connected i gave an
inventory to the father who carried it
to a merchant
the things were sent for the secret was
to be kept until they should arrive
and in the meantime i was to get work if
i could at the other printing house but
i found no vacancy there and so remained
idle
a few days while crimer on a prospect of
being employed to print some paper money
in new jersey which would require cuts
in various types
that i only could supply and
apprehending bradford might engage me
and get the job from him sent me a very
civil message
that old friends should not part for a
few words the effect of sudden passion
and wishing me to return meredith
persuaded me to comply
as it would give more opportunity for
his improvement under my daily
instruction
so i returned and we went on more
smoothly than for some time before
the new jersey job was obtained i
contrived
a copper plate press for it the first
that had been seen in the country
i cut several ornaments and checks for
the bills
we went together to burlington where i
executed the hole to satisfaction
and he received so large largest sum for
the work
as to be enabled thereby to keep his
head much
longer above water at burlington i made
an acquaintance with many principal
people of the province
several of them had been appointed by
the assemblies committee
to attend the press and take care that
no more bills were printed than
the law directed they were therefore by
turns
constantly with us and generally he who
attended brought with him a friend or
two for company my mind having been
much more improved by reading than
climbers i supposed it was for that
reason my conversation
seemed to be more valued they had me to
their houses
introduced me to their friends and
showed me much civility
while he though the master was a little
neglected
in truth he was an odd fish ignorant of
the common life
fond of rudely opposing received
opinions
slovenly to extreme dirtiness
enthusiastic in some points of religion
and a little navish
withhaul we continued there near three
months and by the time i could reckon
among
my acquired friends judge allen samuel
bushtil
the secretary of the province isaac
pearson joseph cooper
and several of the smiths members of the
assembly
and isaac dekau the surveyor general
the latter was a shrewd sagacious old
man who told me that he began for
himself when young
by wheeling clay for brick makers
learned to write after he was of age
carried the chain for surveyors who
taught him surveying and he now
by his industry acquired a good estate
and says he
i foresee that you will soon work this
man out of his business
and make a fortune in it at philadelphia
he had not
then the least intimation of my
intention to set up there or anywhere
these friends were afterwards of great
use to me as i occasionally was
to some of them they all continued their
regard for me
as long as they lived before i enter
upon my public appearance in business it
may be well to let you know the then
state of my mind with regard to my
principles
and morals that you may see how far
those influenced the future
events of my life my parents had early
given me religious impressions
and brought me through my childhood
piously in the dissenting way
but i was scarce 15 when after doubting
by turns of several points
as i found them disputed in the
different books i read
i began to doubt of revelation itself
some books against deism
fell into my hands they were said to be
the substance of sermons preached by
boyle's
lecturers it happened that they wrought
an effect on me quite contrary
to what was intended by them for the
arguments of the deists
which were quoted to be refuted appeared
to me much stronger than the refutations
in short i soon became a thorough deist
my arguments perverted some others
particularly collins and ralph but each
of them having afterwards
wronged me greatly without the least
compunction
and recollecting keith's conduct toward
me
who was another free thinker and my own
towards vernon and miss reed
which at times gave me great trouble i
began to suspect
that this doctrine though it might be
true was not very useful
my london pamphlet which had for its
motto these lines of dryden
whatever is is right though or blind man
sees but a part of the chain the nearest
link his eyes not carried
to the equal beam that poses all above
and from the attributes of god his
infinite wisdom goodness and power
concluded that nothing could possibly be
wrong in the world and that vice and
virtue
were empty distinctions no such things
existed
appeared now not so clever of
performance
as i once thought it and i doubted
whether some error
had not insinuated itself unperceived
into my argument so as to inflict all
that follows as is common in
metaphysical reasonings
i grew convinced that truth sincerity
integrity in dealings between man and
man were of the utmost importance to the
felicity of life
and i formed written resolutions which
still remain in my journal book
to practice them ever while i lived
revelation had indeed no weight with me
as such but i
entertained an opinion that though
certain actions
might not be bad because they were
forbidden by it
or good because it commanded them yet
probably these actions might be
forbidden
because they were bad for us or
commanded
because they were beneficial to us in
their own natures
all the circumstances of things being
considered and this persuasion with the
kind hand of providence
or some other guardian angel or
accidental favorable circumstances
and situations or altogether preserved
me
through this dangerous time of youth and
the hazardous
situations i was sometimes in
among strangers remote from the eye and
advance of my father
without my willful gross immorality
or injustice that might have been
expected from my want of religion
i say willfully because the instances i
have mentioned
had something of necessity in them from
my youth
in experience and the navity of others i
had therefore a
tolerable character to begin the world
with i valued it properly
and determined to perceive it we had not
been long returned to philadelphia
before the new types arrived from london
we settled with kymer and left him by
his consent before he heard of it
we found a house to hire near the market
and took it
to less than the rent which was then but
24 pounds a year
though i have since known it to let 470.
we took in thomas godfrey a glacier and
his family
who were to pay a considerable part of
it to us
and we board with them we had scarce
opened our letters and put our press in
order
before george house an acquaintance of
mine
brought a countryman to us whom he had
met in the street inquiring for a
printer
all our cash was now expanded in a
variety of particulars
we had been obliged to procure and this
countryman's five shillings
being our first fruits and coming so
seasonably
gave me more pleasure than any crown i
have ever since earned and the gratitude
i
felt toward house has made me often more
ready than perhaps i should otherwise
have been to assist young beginners
there are cookers in every country
always boating its ruin such
a one then lived in philadelphia a
person of note an elderly man
with a wise look in a very grave manner
of speaking
his name was samuel michael this
gentleman a stranger to me
stopped one day at my door and asked me
if i was the young man who had lately
opened a new printing house being
answered in the affirmative
he said he was sorry for me because it
was an expensive undertaking
and the expense would be lost for
philadelphia was a sinking place
that people already half bankrupt or
near being so
all appearances to the contrary such as
new buildings and the rise of
rents being to his certain knowledge
fallacious
for they were in fact among the things
that would soon ruin us
and he gave me a detail of misfortunes
now existing
or that were soon to exist that he left
me half melancholy
had i known him before i engaged in this
business probably
i should never have done it this man
continued to live in
this declining place and to decline in
the same strain
refusing for many years to buy a house
there because all was going to
destruction
and at last i had the pleasure of seeing
him give
five times as much for one as he might
have bought it for
when he first began his crooking i
should have mentioned
before that in the autumn of the
preceding year i had farmed
most of my ingenious acquaintance into a
club of mutual improvement
which was called the junto we met on
friday evenings
the rules that i dropped required that
every member in his turn
should produce one or more queries on
any point of morals
politics or natural philosophy to be
discussed by the company
and once in three months produce and
read an essay of his own writing
on any subject he pleased our debates
were to be under the direction of a
president
and to be conducted in the sincere
spirit of inquiry after truth
without funds for dispute or desire of
victory
and to prevent warmth all expressions
of positiveness in opinions or direct
contradictions
were after some time made contraband and
prohibited
under small pecuniary penalties the
first members were joseph brinthnall a
copier of deeds for the scrivener
a good-natured friendly middle-aged man
a great lover of poetry
reading all he could meet with and
writing some that was
tolerable very ingenious in many of the
little knicker knaves and a sensible
conversation
thomas godfrey a self-taught
mathematician great in his way and
afterwards inventor of what is now
called
hadley's quadrant but he knew little out
of his way
and was not a pleasing companion as like
most great mathematicians i have met
with
he expected universal precision in
everything said
or was forever denying or distinguishing
upon trifles
to the disturbance of all conversation
he soon left us
nicholas skull a surveyor afterwards
surveyor general
who loved books and sometimes made a few
verse
william parson brought a shoemaker but
loving reader had acquired a
considerable share of mathematics
which he first studied with a view to
astrology
that he afterwards laughed at it he also
became surveyor general
william mogridge a joiner a most
exquisite mechanic and a solid sensible
man
hugh meredith stephen potts and george
webb
i have characterized before robert grace
the young gentleman of some fortune
generous lively and witty a lover of
punting
and of his friends and william coleman
then a merchant's clerk about my
age who had the coolest clearest head
and best heart
and the exactest morals of almost
any man i ever met with he became
afterwards a merchant of great note
and one of our provincial judges our
friendship continued without
interruption to his death
upwards of 40 years and the club
continued almost as long
and was the best school of philosophy
morality and politics
that then existed in the province for
our queries
which were read the week preceding their
discussions
put us upon reading with attention upon
the several subjects
that we might speak more to the purpose
and thereto
we acquired better habits of
conversation everything being studied in
our rules
which might prevent our distinguishing
each other
from hence the long continuance of the
club
i shall have frequent occasion to speak
further of hereafter
but by giving this account of it here is
to show
something of the interest i had every
one of these exerting themselves and
recommending business to us
berenthal particularly procured us from
the quakers
the printing 40 sheets of their history
the rest being to be done
by kaimer and upon this we worked
exceedingly hard
for the price was low it was a folio pro
patriot size in pica with long
printer notes i composed of it a sheet a
day
and meredith worked it off at press and
it was often 11 at night and sometimes
later before i had finished my
distribution
for the next day's work for the little
jobs sent in by our other friends now
and then
put us back but so determined i was to
continue doing a sheet of day
of the folio that one night when having
imposed my forms
i thought my days were over one of them
by accident was broken and two pages
reduced to pi
i immediately distributed and composited
all over again
before i went to bed and this industry
visible to our neighbors began to give
us character and credit
particularly i was told that mentioned
being made of the new printing office at
the merchants
every night club the general opinion was
that it must fail there being already
two printers in the place
kymer and bradford dr baird whom
you and i saw many years after at his
native place
saint andrews in scotland gave a
contrary opinion
for the industry of that franklin says
he is superior to anything i ever saw of
the kind
i see him still at work when i go home
from club
and he is at work again before his
neighbors are out of bed
this struck the rest and we soon had
offers
from one of them to supply us with
stationary
but as yet we did not choose to engage
in shop business
i mention this industry more
particularly and the more freely though
it seems to be talking in my own praise
but those of my posterity who shall read
it
may know the use of that virtue when
they see its effects in my favor
throughout
this relation george webb who had found
a female friend
that led him wherewith to purchase his
time of kymer
now came to offer himself as a
journeyman to us
we could not then employ him but i
foolishly let him know
as a secret that i soon intended to be
in a newspaper
and might then have worked for him my
hopes of success as i told him
were founded on this that the then only
newspaper
printed by bradford was a paltry thing
wretchedly managed no way entertaining
and yet was profitable to him i
therefore thought a good paper
would scarcely fail of good
encouragement
i requested webb not to mention it but
he told it to kymer
who immediately to be beforehand with me
published proposals for printing one
himself on which
webb was to be employed i resented this
and to counteract them as i could not
yet begin our paper
i wrote several pieces of entertainment
for bradford's paper
under the title of the busybody which
fentanyl continued some months but
this means the attention of the public
was fixed on that paper
and kymer's proposals which we burlesque
and ridiculed were disregarded he began
his paper however and after carrying it
on
three quarters of a year with at most
only 90 subscribers
he offered it to me for a trifle and i
having been ready some time to go on
with it
took it in hand directly and it proved
in a few years
extremely profitable to me i perceive
that i
am apt to speak in the singular number
though our partnership
still continued the reason may be that
in fact
the whole management of the business lay
upon me meredith was no compositor
a poor pressman and seldom sober my
friends lamented my connection with him
but i was to make the best of it our
first papers made
a quite different appearance from any
before in the province
a better type and better printed but
some spirited remarks of my writing
on the dispute then going on between
governor burnett
and the massachusetts assembly struck
the principal people
occasioned the paper and the manager of
it to be talked of
and in a few weeks brought them all to
be our subscribers
the example was followed by many and our
number went on growing continually
this was one of the first good effects
of my having learnt a little scribble
another was that the leading men seeing
a newspaper now in the hands of one who
could also handle a pen
thought it convenient to oblige and
encourage me
bradford still printed the votes and
laws and other public business
he had printed an address of the house
to the governor
in a course blundering manner we
reprinted it elegantly and
correct and sent out to every member
they were sensible to the difference
it strengthened the hands of our friends
in the house
and they voted us their printers for the
year ensuing
among my friends in the house i must not
forget mr
hamilton before mentioned who was then
returned from england
and had a seat in it he interested
himself
for me strongly in that instance as he
did
in many others afterwards continuing his
patronage until his death
mr vernon about this time put me in mind
of the dead i owed him
but did not press me i wrote him an
ingenious letter of acknowledgement
craved his forbearance little longer
which he allowed me
and as soon as i was able i paid the
principal with interest
and many thanks so that iratama was in
some degree corrected
but now another difficulty came upon me
which i had never the least reason to
expect
mr mira's father who was to have paid
for our printing house
according to the expectations given me
was able to advance
only 100 pounds currency which had been
paid
and a hundred more was due to the
merchant who grew impatient
and sued us all we gave baal but saw
that if the money could not be raised in
time
the suit must soon come to judgment and
execution
and our hopeful prospects must with us
be ruined
as the press and letters must be sold
for payment
perhaps at half price in this distress
two true friends whose kindness i have
never forgotten
nor ever shall forget while i can
remember anything
came to me separately unknown to each
other and without any application from
me
offering each of them to advance me all
the money that should be necessary
to enable me to take the whole business
upon myself
if that should be practical but they did
not like my continuing the partnership
with meredith
who as they said was often seen drunk in
the streets
and playing at low games in ale houses
much to our discredit
these two friends were william coleman
and robert grace
i told them i could not propose a
separation
while any prospect remained of the
meredith's
fulfilling their part of our agreement
because i thought myself under great
obligation to them
for what they had done and would do if
they could
but if they finally failed in their
performance and our partnership must be
dissolved
i should then think myself at liberty to
accept the assistance of my friends
thus the matter rested for some time
when i said to my partner
perhaps your father is dissatisfied at
the part you have undertaken
in this affair of ours and is unwilling
to advance for you and
me what he would for you alone if that
is the case tell me
and i will resign the whole to you and
go about my business
no said he my father has really been
disappointed
and is really unable and i am unwilling
to distress him further
i see this as a business i am not fit
for it
i was bred a farmer and it was a folly
in me to come to town
and put myself at 30 years of age an
apprentice to learn a new trade
many of our welch people are going to
settle in north carolina where
land is cheap i am inclined to go with
them and follow my old employment
but you may find friends to assist you
if you will take the debts of the
company upon you return to my father the
hundred pounds he has advanced
pay my little personal debts and give me
thirty pounds
and a new saddle i will relinquish the
partnership and leave the hole in your
hands
i agreed to this proposal it was drawn
up in writing
signed and sealed immediately i gave him
what he demanded
and he went soon after to carolina from
which he sent me next year two long
letters
containing the best account that had
been given of that country the climate
the soil
husbandry etc for in those matters he
was very judicious
i printed them in the papers and they
gave great satisfaction to the public
as soon as he was gone i recurred to my
two friends
and because i would not give an unkind
preference to either
i took half of what each had offered and
i wanted of one
and half of the other paid off the
company's debts
and went on with the business in my own
name advertising that the partnership
was dissolved
i think it was in or about the year 1729
end of chapter 7
the autobiography of benjamin franklin
chapter eight
this is a librivox recording all
librivox recordings are in the public
domain
for more information or to volunteer
please visit
librivox.org the autobiography of
benjamin franklin
edited by frank woodworth-pine chapter 8
business success and first public
service
about this time there was a cry among
the people for more paper money
only 15 000 pounds being extant in the
province
and that soon to be sunk the wealthy
inhabitants
opposed any addition being against all
paper currency
from an apprehension that it would
depreciate as it had done in new england
to the prejudice of all creditors we had
discussed this point
in our junta where i was on the side of
an addition
being persuaded that the first small sum
struck in 1723 had done much
good by increasing the trade employment
and number of inhabitants in the
province
since i now saw all the old houses
inhabited
and many new ones building whereas i
remembered well
that when i first walked about the
streets of philadelphia
eating my role i saw most of the houses
on walnut street
between second and front streets with
bills on their doors
to be let and many likewise in
chestnut street and other streets
which made me think the inhabitants of
the city
were deserting it one after another
our debates possessed me so fully of the
subject
that i wrote and printed an anonymous
pamphlet on it entitled
the nature and necessity of a paper
currency it was well received by the
common people in general
but the rich men disliked it for it
increased and strengthened the clamor
for more money
and they happening to have no writers
among them
that were able to answer it their
opposition slackened
and the point was carried by a majority
in the house
my friends there who conceived i had
been of some service
thought fit to reward me by employing me
in printing the money